# MAC in ISO-API

All messages to and from the ISO-API are protected using a Message Authentication Code (MAC). The initiator of the message
create a MAC according to the agreed parameters and the receiver of the message verifies the MAC. If the MAC verification
fail, the message is rejected. Likewise, the MAC in the response needs to be verified by the initiator of the message.

## MAC details

The following principles shall be applied:

* All ISO messages are protected using a message authentication code (MAC).
* A new MAC key is generated for each ISO Message, this key is called ephemeral MAC key. The key can be reused for
  several messages within a limited time frame (recommendation: maximum 1 hour).
* The MAC key is secured using an encryption key, referred to as the Key Interchange (KI) key, with an agreed key protection method.
* Key Interchange Keys will be exchanged between each party encrypted under a ZMK
* The ZMK (Zone Master Key) are exchanged during a key ceremony and imported into HSM.

## Message preparation

The MAC is computed over the full ISO message excluding the MAC field (Field 64). The message is transformed using a
defined message transformation before the MAC is computed. The resulting MAC is put in Field 64 of the ISO message.

Note that the key used to compute the MAC needs to be present in the ISO message, encrypted under the Key Interchange key.

So, the whole message needs to be completed before the MAC is computed, except for the MAC field itself.

Please note that the ISO bitmap needs to be updated to reflect the presence of Field 64 before the MAC is computed, as
the field will be present when the MAC is verified.

This can be summarised in the following steps:

1. Generate a new ephemeral MAC key
2. Encrypt the MAC key under the Key Interchange key and put it in Field 48, subfield 002
3. Prepare the ISO message, including updating the bitmap to reflect the presence of Field 64
4. Transform the message using the agreed message transformation
5. Compute the MAC over the transformed message using the ephemeral MAC key
6. Put the MAC in Field 64 of the ISO message

### Message transformations

The transformation is applied to the message and the output from the transformation is input to the MAC algorithm. The
following transformations are supported:

* SHA1
* SHA-256
* None

### MAC algorithms

The following algorithms are supported:

CMAC (AES)

### Deprecated MAC algorithms

For legacy projects, the ISO-API still support the following deprecated MAC algorithms, but this will not be supported
for new projects.

ISO 9797 algorithm 3 (3DES)

### MAC key protection alternatives

Currently there is support for 5 key interchange alternatives

* AES-128 (TR-31)
* AES-192 (TR-31)
* AES-256 (TR-31)

#### Deprecated key interchange alternatives

* 2KeyTDES ECB no-padding
* 3KeyTDES ECB no-padding

## Key Interchange

KI (Key Interchange) is the encrypted key used to encrypt the ephemeral MAC Key
KI shall be exchanged between the parties during the setup phase.
KI are exchanged encrypted under ZMK and shall be protected by HSM.
KI is identified by a key index (1 to 255) and allow Key Interchange switchover (key renewal)
Key index is present in ISO Message in field 48, subfield 001.

When using 3DES keys, the KI and ZMK must be 3DES keys of equal or better strength
When using AES keys, the KI and ZMK must be AES keys of equal or better strength

## MAC key

A MAC key shall be present in each ISO message, encrypted under KI in (Identifier "002", the MAC key)
The MAC key is an ephemeral key to be generated by each party and could be reused in several ISO Messages.
The maximum lifetime recommendation for an ephemeral MAC key is 1 hour.

## MAC

MAC shall be computed for each ISO Message.
MAC is present in Field n° 64 – Message Authentication Code
Input data of the MAC is SHA-256 hash of the full ISO payload encoded to bytes excluding the mac value field (Field 64).
Note: SHA-256 hash is used by default. SHA-1 hash can be used under request.

## Keys type and algorithms – AES

|                  |                                                                                                                                     |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| KI Key Type      | AES (128, 192 or 256 bits)                                                                                                          |
| MAC Key Type     | AES 128, 192 or 256 bits                                                                                                            |
| MAC Key wrapping | AES TR-31                                                                                                                           |
| MAC	             | AES-CMAC Algorithm (RFC 4493), with padding as defined in the AES-CMAC specification The MAC is the 8 leftmost bytes of the output. |


## Keys type and algorithms – 3DES - deprecated

|                  |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
|------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| KI Key Type      | "3 key" 3DES (size 24 bytes) or "2 key" 3DES (size 16 bytes) (*)                                                                                                                                                                                |
| MAC Key Type     | "2 key" 3DES (size 16 bytes)                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| MAC Key wrapping | 3DES using CBC or ECB                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| MAC              | MAC Algorithm 3 (ISO 9797-1 Algorithm 3). Padding method 1 is used: input data is completed with `0`s until the data reaches a multiple of 8-byte blocks. No `0` is added if already a multiple. The MAC is the 8 leftmost bytes of the output. |

(*) KI Key length depends to remote Host capability

